All right.
So before we get started, I feel like it's important that, you know, at least the basic idea of how
the process of getting and loading a web page in your browser works.
So for some of you, this may be very simple.
You may already know this stuff.
For some of you, this may be very confusing and daunting.
If it is confusing, just know that you'll understand this process more as time goes on and you don't
need to know it to start building websites.
I think a good metaphor for this is that you don't need to know how an engine works to be able to to
learn how to drive a car.
And the stuff that I'm going to talk about here in this in this section, it all happens under the hood.
So if you're a beginner and you're just stepping into this world, don't worry if you don't understand
this stuff.
I just think it's important to mention before we start.
All right.
So we all use the Internet every day, but most people don't know how it actually works.
And they just know they go to, you know, facebook.com or whatever and it loads their profile, their
social media.
So I'm going to try to explain what actually goes on under the hood in very simple terms.
Basically, the Internet is a global network of computers and devices, and these computers have what's
called an IP address to uniquely identify them, just like an actual address for your home.
And these IP addresses, they're assigned to you by your Internet service providers, and they're usually
in the form of four numbers with dots in between just like this here.
Now, this is a version four IP address.
There's also version six IP addresses that are much longer.
And these were created for when we run out of version four IP addresses and you can actually go to Google
and just search what's my IP and you'll find different sites that will actually trace it and show it
to you if you want to know what your current IP address is.
Now, even if you have multiple devices in your home, like let's say you have two computers, a tablet,
a mobile device, each of these devices, they all have what's called a private IP address that is only
local to your network, your home network.
Your router, however, has a public IP address, and that's the IP address that the Internet actually
sees all the private ones for each device that's only within your home network or your your office network,
whatever it may be.
All right.
Now, the way that computers talk to each other is over something called the TCP IP protocol.
And a protocol is basically just a way for computers to communicate almost like a language that so they
can speak to each other.
Don't worry too much about this.
If you're getting into computer networking and stuff like that, it's very important to understand the
different network layers and so on, how data packets are sent.
But that's not important for what we're doing here or even to become a web developer.
Now, HTTP is a little more important for you to understand.
This stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol, and if you notice when you type in website URL like Google.com,
Facebook, you're usually doing HTTP or https.
HTTPS is for secure connections using an SSL certificate and we'll talk more about that later.
But basically, HTTP is what's called an application layer protocol and it actually runs over TCP and
it's responsible for handling web traffic between a browser like Google Chrome or Firefox and a Web
server that stores a website.
And we'll talk more about that in the next slide.
So HTTP is one of many types of application layer protocols.
You also have, for instance, SMTP, which deals with email, you have FTP and SSH.
These these deal with transferring files over the Internet.
HTTP, however, is going to be the one you deal with the most in web development.
So websites and web pages are basically just files that are stored on computers that run a piece of
software called a web server.
And an example of a web server would be Apache or Engine X.
Don't worry if you've never heard of these before.
Technically, you could run a web server from your home on a computer, but most ISPs prohibit doing
that, and you probably wouldn't want to do that anyways because if for some reason the computer shuts
off or something happens, your website goes down.
So what you usually do is you you can build a website on your local machine at your home or office,
and then you would upload it to a hosting company or to a server that a hosting company owns.
And there's all different types of hosting accounts.
You can actually get a dedicated server, which is an actual computer that's dedicated to to you for
your use.
But those are really expensive.
You have shared hosting where you share accounts on one server with other people.
This is this is much cheaper.
And I'll go over the different types of hosting in a later section.
But that's basically what you're going to do is use a hosting company.
And in addition to that, you're going to need a domain name, which can be a dot com dot net dot org
and many other.
Shields.
Now, remember, all computers, including Web servers, have an IP address, but it would really suck
if you wanted to go to Facebook or Google and you had to remember something like 7522128131.
So what happens is when you type in, for instance, HTTP, colon, slash, slash, WW dot, facebook.com,
there's something called a DNS or a domain name service that actually maps that domain to the correct
IP address of Facebook.com or whatever website you're visiting.
And this makes our lives much easier.
Otherwise you'd probably have have a notebook with, you know, hundreds of numbers for each website
that you want to visit.
So later on, I'm actually going to show you how to register a domain name and how to upload a website
to a Web hosting account.
All right.
So let's take a quick look at a diagram that kind of explains what we've been talking about.
So you, the user down at the bottom types in, let's say, Google.com into a web browser and this could
be Microsoft Edge, Google Chrome, Firefox, Safari, any Web browser.
And the DNS server looks at the domain name such as Google.com and it maps it to the IP address that's
needed, as you can see right here.
Once it gets that IP address, it then makes a what's called an HTTP request to the web server of that
IP address.
And then that web server will return.
It'll return a response with the HTML file that needs to be load any other files, including CSS files
which are used for styling.
You have any images that that are on the page, those will get sent and whatever else is needed for
Google.com to be loaded in your browser.
Now these HTTP requests, they're made when you load a web page as well as when you, for instance,
submit a form.
And there's different types of requests, there's different status codes, but that's all stuff you're
going to learn later on.
When you get into scripting and programming, you don't need to know that stuff to create basic static
web pages with HTML and CSS.
So this is obviously a very brief summary.
There's a lot more that goes into it.
It's much more intricate when you get into networking layers and so on.
But that again, that's not stuff that you guys need to know right now.
One thing about web development in general is it can be very overwhelming because there's just so many
different technologies to learn.
But HTML and CSS, the they're the building blocks of all websites and web applications.
So in the next video, I want to talk more about the roles of HTML and CSS.